🧪 What is Pylint in Python?
Pylint is a static code analysis tool used to check Python code for:

Coding standard violations (PEP8)

Programming errors (e.g., undefined variables)

Code smells (e.g., duplicate code, too many arguments)

Code quality (e.g., unused imports, unreachable code)

Custom naming conventions

It helps ensure your code is clean, readable, maintainable, and less error-prone before running it.

🔄 Basic Usage:

pylint your_script.py
You'll get a score out of 10, with warnings, errors, and suggestions.

🧩 Different Stages in Pylint (Pipeline Breakdown)
When you run pylint, it internally goes through several analysis stages:

1. Tokenization
Converts the source code into tokens (identifiers, keywords, literals).

It checks for basic syntax issues early (e.g., missing colons or indentation).

2. Parsing / AST Generation
Builds an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) from the tokens.

This tree represents the structure of the code (classes, functions, etc.).

3. AST Analysis (Checker Stage)
Core analysis happens here:

Imports: Are there unused or missing imports?

Variables: Are variables defined before use?

Functions: Are docstrings missing? Too many arguments?

Code Smells: Duplicate code, high complexity, etc.

4. Symbol Table Building
Tracks all identifiers (variables, functions, classes) and their scope.

Useful for detecting undefined variables, shadowing, or unused variables.

5. Type Inference
Tries to guess the type of variables (even though Python is dynamically typed).

This helps catch mismatched operations (e.g., string + int).

6. Custom Plugin & Configuration Stage
You can enable/disable specific checkers or load custom plugins.

Pylint reads from .pylintrc or pyproject.toml config files.

7. Reporting
Collects all the findings and prints them.

You get message codes like:

C: Convention (PEP8)

R: Refactor recommendation

W: Warning

E: Error

F: Fatal error

Example output:

vbnet
Copy
Edit
C:  1, 0: Missing module docstring (missing-module-docstring)
W: 10, 4: Unused variable 'x' (unused-variable)
🛠 Common Pylint Commands
Disable a rule:

bash
Copy
Edit
pylint your_file.py --disable=missing-docstring
Generate a default config file:

bash
Copy
Edit
pylint --generate-rcfile > .pylintrc
Use with pre-commit hooks or CI pipelines to enforce quality before merge.

📌 Summary Table
Stage	Purpose
Tokenization	Break source into tokens
AST Generation	Build structured tree of code
Checker Analysis	Apply rules for bugs, smells, PEP8
Symbol Table	Track variable/function/class scopes
Type Inference	Guess types to find mismatches
Plugin/Config	Apply custom rules or disable checkers
Reporting	Show results with scores & messages

Let me know if you'd like help setting up Pylint or customizing rules for your project.